.. _req-hard-disk:

#######################
Disk space requirements
#######################

The following sections will help you assess how much disk space you
will need on your server to store GEOS-Chem Classic :ref:`input data
<data>` and :ref:`output data <outfiles>`.

.. _req-hard-disk-limits:

======================================
Space for GEOS-Chem Classic input data
======================================

The data format used by GEOS-Chem Classic is :ref:`COARDS-compliant
netCDF <coards-guide>`. This is a standard file format used for Earth
Science applications. See our :ref:`netCDF guide <ncguide>` for more
information.

.. _req-hard-disk-emis:

Emissions input fields
----------------------

Please see our :ref:`Emissions input data <gcid-data-org-emis-inputs>`
section for more information.

.. _req-hard-disk-met:

Meteorology fields
------------------

The amount of disk space that you will need depends on two things:

  1. Which type of met data you will use, and
  2. How many years of met data you will download

.. _merra2-size-table:

MERRA-2
~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: Disk space needed for 1-year of MERRA-2 data
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 60 40

   * - Grid
     - Approzimate Size (GB/yr)
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-4x5`
     - 30
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-2x25`
     - 110
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-05-as`
     - 115
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-05-eu`
     - 60
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-05-na`
     - 110

.. _geosfp-size-table:

GEOS-FP
~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: Disk space needed for 1-year of GEOS-FP data
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 60 40

   * - Grid
     - Approximate Size (GB/yr)
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-4x5`
     - 30
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-2x25`
     - 120
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-af`
     - 434
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-as`
     - 380
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-eu`
     - 125
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-me`
     - 175
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-na`
     - 200
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-oc`
     - 240
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-sa`
     - 250
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-ru`
     - 375
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-0125-af`
     - 2,100 [#A]_
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-0125-as`
     - 2,200 [#B]_
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-0125-na`
     - 1,250 [#C]_
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-sa`
     - 1,900 [#D]_

.. rubric:: Notes

.. [#A] Winds, pressures, and specific humidity are read at 0.125° x
        0.15625° over the nested Africa domain.  Other met fields are
        taken from the GEOS-FP  :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-af` archive.

.. [#B] Winds, pressures, and specific humidity are read at 0.125° x
        0.15625° over the nested Asia domain.  Other met fields are
        taken from the GEOS-FP :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-as` archive.

.. [#C] Winds, pressures, and specific humidity are read at 0.125° x
        0.15625° over the nested North America domain.  Other met
        fields are taken from the GEOS-FP
        :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-na` archive.

.. [#D] Winds, pressures, and specific humidity are read at 0.125° x
        0.15625° over the nested South America domain.  Other met
        fields are taken from the GEOS-FP
        :ref:`gcc-hgrids-nested-025-sa` archive.

.. _geosit-size-table:

GEOS-IT
~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: Disk space needed for 1-year of GEOS-IT data
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 60 40

   * - Grid
     - Approximate Size (GB/yr)
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-4x5`
     - 26
   * - :ref:`gcc-hgrids-global-2x25`
     - 78

.. _gcap2-size-table:

GCAP 2.0
~~~~~~~~

See the U. Rochester data portal: http://atmos.earth.rochester.edu/input/gc/ExtData/

.. _obtaining-emissions-data-and-met-fields:

Obtaining emissions data and met fields
---------------------------------------

There are several ways to obtain the input data required for GEOS-Chem
classic.  These are described in more detail in the following
sections.

#. Perform a :ref:`GEOS-Chem dry-run simulation <dry-run>`;
#. Download and manage data with the :ref:`bashdatacatalog tool
   <bashdatacatalog>`;
#. Transfer data with `Globus <https://www.globus.org/data-transfer>`_
   **GEOS-Chem data (WashU)** endpoint;
#. Direct FTP access from the `WashU data portal
   <https://geoschemdata.wustl.edu>`_;
#. Direct access from the `Amazon data portal using AWS S3 Explorer <https://s3.amazonaws.com/gcgrid/index.html>`_.

Also see our :ref:`data` chapter for more data download options.

.. _data-generated-by-geos-chem:

=============================================
Space for data generated by GEOS-Chem Classic
=============================================

.. _monthly-mean-output:

Monthly-mean output
-------------------

We can look to the :program:`GEOS-Chem Classic` full-chemistry
benchmark simulations for a rough upper limit of how much disk space
is needed for diagnostic output.  The `GEOS-Chem 13.0.0 vs. 12.9.0
1-month benchmark simulation
<https://wiki.geos-chem.org/GEOS-Chem_13.0.0#GEOS-Chem_Classic_13.0.0_vs_12.9.0>`_
generated approximately 837 MB/month of output.  Of this amount,
diagnostic output files accounted for ~646 MB and restart files
accounted for ~191 MB.

We say that this is an upper limit, because benchmark simulations
archive the "kitchen sink"--all species concentrations, various
aerosol diagnostics, convective fluxes, dry dep fluxes and velocities,
J-values, various chemical and meteorological quantities, transport
fluxes,  wet deposition diagnostics, and emissions diagnostics.  Most
GEOS-Chem users would probably not need to archive this much output.

:program:`GEOS-Chem Classic` specialty simulations--simulations for
species with first-order loss by prescribed oxidant fields (i.e. Hg,
CH4, CO2, CO)--will produce much less output than the benchmark
simulations. This is because these simulations typically only have a
few species.

.. _reducing-output-file-sizes:

Reducing output file sizes
--------------------------

You may subset the horizontal and vertical size of the diagnostic
output files in order to save space.  For more information, please see
our section on :ref:`history-diagnostics`.

Furthermore, since GEOS-Chem 13.0.0, we have modified the diagnostic
code so that diagnostic arrays are only dimensioned with enough
elements necessary to save out the required output.  For example, if
you only wish to output the SpeciesConc_O3 diagnostic, GEOS-Chem will
dimension the relevant array with (NX,NY,NZ,1) elements (1 because we
are only archiving 1 species).  This can drastically reduce the amount
of memory that your simulation will require.

.. _timeseries-output:

Timeseries output
-----------------

Archiving hourly or daily timeseries output would require much more
disk space than the monthly-mean output.  The disk space actually used
will depend on how many quantities are archived and what the archival
frequency is.
